Article about User Defined Value Types (#148)
ethereum/solidity-blog: _posts/2021-09-13-user-defined-value-types.md

---
layout: post
published: true
title:  User Defined Value Types in Solidity
date:   2021-09-13
author: Solidity Team
category: Explainers
---

Solidity [Solidity v0.8.8](https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/releases/tag/v0.8.8) introduces
[user defined value
types](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/develop/types.html?#user-defined-value-types) as a means to

> create zero-cost abstractions over an elementary value type.

Reviewer: What is the benefit of a zero-cost abstraction? (maybe mention additional type-safety, etc)

## Motivation

A problem with primitive value types is that they are not very descriptive. For example, one may
want to use `uint128` to store the price of some object as well as the quantity available. Having
stricter type rules to avoid intermingling of the two different concepts can also quite useful. For
example, one may want to disallow assigning a quantity to a price or vice versa.

A [struct](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/develop/types.html#structs) solves both of these

> problems, for example, by abstracting the price and the quantity as structs. The following solidity

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
problems, for example, by abstracting the price and the quantity as structs. The following Solidity
```

> A [struct](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/develop/types.html#structs) solves both of these
> problems, for example, by abstracting the price and the quantity as structs. The following solidity
> snippet demonstrates this:

Reviewer 3: *Both* problems? Well, ok, you had ``Furthermore,...`` above, but to me it seems like one and the same problem... maybe

```suggestion
One option for solving this issue is using [structs](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/develop/types.html#structs). For example, price and quantity can be abstracted as structs as follows:
```
?

```solidity
struct Price { uint128 price; }
struct Quantity { uint128 quantity; }

function toPrice(uint128 price) returns(Price memory) {
    return Price(price);
}
function fromPrice(Price memory price) returns(uint128) {
   return price.price;
}
function toQuantity(uint128 quantity) returns(Quantity memory) {
    return Quantity(quantity);
}
function fromQuantity(Quantity memory quantity) returns(uint128) {
    return quantity.quantity;
}
```

However, a [struct](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/latest/types.html?#structs) is a reference type
and therefore always points to a value in `memory`, `calldata` or `storage`. This means that the
above abstraction has a runtime overhead, i.e., additional gas when compared to using just `uint128`

> to represent the underlying value. In particular, the functions `toPrice` and `toQuantity` involves

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
to represent the underlying value. In particular, the functions `toPrice` and `toQuantity` involve
```

> storing the value in memory. Similarly, the functions `fromPrice` and `fromQuantity` reads this

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
storing the value in memory. Similarly, the functions `fromPrice` and `fromQuantity` read the respective
```

> storing the value in memory. Similarly, the functions `fromPrice` and `fromQuantity` reads this

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
storing the value in memory. Similarly, the functions `fromPrice` and `fromQuantity` read this
```

> value from memory. Together, these functions passes the value from `stack -> memory -> stack` which

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
value from memory. Together, these functions pass the value from `stack -> memory -> stack` which
```

> value from memory. Together, these functions passes the value from `stack -> memory -> stack` which

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
value from memory. Together, these functions pass the value from `stack -> memory -> stack` which
```

> is often unnecessary and incurs a runtime cost. This creates a need for user defined value types,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
is often unnecessary and incurs a runtime cost. This issue is solved by user defined value types,
```
?

which are abstractions of elementary value types (such as `uint8` or `address`), without any
additional runtime overhead.

## Syntax for User Defined Value Types

A user defined value type is defined using `type C is V`, where `C` is the name of the newly

> introduced type and `V` has to be a built-in value type (the "underlying type".) The function

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
introduced type and `V` has to be a built-in value type (the "underlying type"). The function
```

        return UFixed256x18.wrap(UFixed256x18.unwrap(a) + UFixed256x18.unwrap(b));
    }
    /// Multiplies UFixed256x18 and uint256. Reverts on overflow, relying on checked
    /// arithmetic on uint256.
    function mul(UFixed256x18 a, uint256 b) internal pure returns (UFixed256x18) {
        return UFixed256x18.wrap(UFixed256x18.unwrap(a) * b);
    }
    /// Take the floor of a UFixed256x18 number.
    /// @return the largest integer that does not exceed `a`.
    function floor(UFixed256x18 a) internal pure returns (uint256) {
        return UFixed256x18.unwrap(a) / multiplier;
    }
    /// Turns a uint256 into a UFixed256x18 of the same value.
    /// Reverts if the integer is too large.
    function toUFixed256x18(uint256 a) internal pure returns (UFixed256x18) {
        return UFixed256x18.wrap(a * multiplier);
    }
}
```

Notice how `UFixed256x18.wrap` and `FixedMath.toUFixed256x18` have the same signature but perform
two very different operations: The `UFixed256x18.wrap` function returns a `UFixed256x18` that has
the same data representation as the input, whereas `toUFixed256x18` returns a `UFixed256x18` that
has the same numerical value.

> ## Operators and Type rules

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Operators and Type Rules
```

User defined value types currently does not have any operators. In particular, even the operator

> `==` is not defined. However, allowing operators is currently being discussed. One can follow this

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`==` is not defined. However, allowing operators is currently being discussed. You can join or follow this
```

> discussion in the [solidity

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
discussion in the [Solidity
```

forum](https://forum.soliditylang.org/t/user-defined-types-and-operators/456).

> Explicit and implicit conversions to and from other types are disallowed.

Reviewer 2: Optional: This is a weird way to end the article since the sentence before that was a nice wrap up. Maybe we can move it somewhere?

Author: I moved it two lines above.

---
layout: post
published: true
title:  User Defined Value Types in Solidity
date:   2021-09-13
author: Solidity Team
category: Explainers
---

Solidity [Solidity v0.8.8](https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/releases/tag/v0.8.8) introduces
[user defined value
types](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/develop/types.html?#user-defined-value-types) as a means to
create zero-cost abstractions over an elementary value type.

## Motivation

> A problem with primitive value types is that they are not very descriptive. For example, one may

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A problem with primitive value types is that they are not very descriptive: They only specify
how data is stored and not how it is to be interpreted. For example, one may
```

want to use `uint128` to store the price of some object as well as the quantity available. Having
stricter type rules to avoid intermingling of the two different concepts can also be quite useful.
For example, one may want to disallow assigning a quantity to a price or vice versa.

One option for solving this issue is by using
[structs](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/develop/types.html#structs). For example, price and
quantity can be abstracted as structs as follows:

```solidity
struct Price { uint128 price; }
struct Quantity { uint128 quantity; }

function toPrice(uint128 price) returns(Price memory) {
    return Price(price);
}
function fromPrice(Price memory price) returns(uint128) {
   return price.price;
}
function toQuantity(uint128 quantity) returns(Quantity memory) {
    return Quantity(quantity);
}
function fromQuantity(Quantity memory quantity) returns(uint128) {
    return quantity.quantity;
}
```

However, a [struct](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/latest/types.html?#structs) is a reference type

> and therefore always points to a value in `memory`, `calldata` or `storage`. This means that the

Reviewer: I remember that somehow it is always better to use double backticks in rst, but I don't remember why.

Author: But this is just plain markdown file.

above abstraction has a runtime overhead, i.e., additional gas when compared to using just `uint128`
to represent the underlying value. In particular, the functions `toPrice` and `toQuantity` involve
storing the value in memory. Similarly, the functions `fromPrice` and `fromQuantity` read the respective
value from memory. Together, these functions pass the value from `stack -> memory -> stack` which

> is often unnecessary and incurs a runtime cost. This issue is solved by user defined value types,

Reviewer: and wastes memory?

which are abstractions of elementary value types (such as `uint8` or `address`), without any
additional runtime overhead.

## Syntax for User Defined Value Types

> A user defined value type is defined using `type C is V`, where `C` is the name of the newly

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A user defined value type is defined using `type C is V;`, where `C` is the name of the newly
```

selector](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/latest/abi-spec.html#function-selector) as well as the
same [ABI encoding and
decoding](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/latest/abi-spec.html#mapping-solidity-to-abi-types). This
allows using user defined value types in a backwards compatible way.

```solidity
pragma solidity ^0.8.8;

type Decimal18 is uint256;

interface MinimalERC20 {
    function transfer(address to, Decimal18 value) external;
}

interface AnotherMinimalERC20 {
    function transfer(address to, uint256 value) external;
}
```

Notice in the above example, how the user defined type `Decimal18` makes it clear that a value is
supposed to represent a number with 18 decimals.

## Example

The following example illustrates a custom type `UFixed256x18` representing a decimal fixed point
type with 18 decimals and a minimal library to do arithmetic operations on the type.

```solidity
// SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-3.0
pragma solidity ^0.8.8;

// Represent a 18 decimal, 256 bit wide fixed point type using a user defined value type.
type UFixed256x18 is uint256;

/// A minimal library to do fixed point operations on UFixed256x18.

> library FixedMath {

Reviewer: Do we really need the library? There is no `using` statement.

Author: Good point. Maybe an average user might not care about a `library` example. On the other hand, a fixed point library is somewhat of a canonical use-case for user defined value types. Technically, you could just use `FixedMath.add(...)` instead of `UFixed256x18.wrap(5).add(...)`.

        return UFixed256x18.wrap(UFixed256x18.unwrap(a) + UFixed256x18.unwrap(b));
    }
    /// Multiplies UFixed256x18 and uint256. Reverts on overflow, relying on checked
    /// arithmetic on uint256.
    function mul(UFixed256x18 a, uint256 b) internal pure returns (UFixed256x18) {
        return UFixed256x18.wrap(UFixed256x18.unwrap(a) * b);
    }
    /// Take the floor of a UFixed256x18 number.
    /// @return the largest integer that does not exceed `a`.
    function floor(UFixed256x18 a) internal pure returns (uint256) {
        return UFixed256x18.unwrap(a) / multiplier;
    }
    /// Turns a uint256 into a UFixed256x18 of the same value.
    /// Reverts if the integer is too large.
    function toUFixed256x18(uint256 a) internal pure returns (UFixed256x18) {
        return UFixed256x18.wrap(a * multiplier);
    }
}
```

Notice how `UFixed256x18.wrap` and `FixedMath.toUFixed256x18` have the same signature but perform
two very different operations: The `UFixed256x18.wrap` function returns a `UFixed256x18` that has
the same data representation as the input, whereas `toUFixed256x18` returns a `UFixed256x18` that
has the same numerical value.

> 

Reviewer: Maybe we could also add that a proper type implementation should only used the `wrap` and `unwrap` functions in the file that defines the type but not outside to provide encapsulation?

Author: I can add this, but this makes me wonder if this should have been part of the compiler, i.e., `wrap` and `unwrap` functions are only available in the same scope as the definition.

## Operators and Type Rules

Explicit and implicit conversions to and from other types are disallowed.

Currently, no operators are defined for user defined value types. In particular, even the operator
`==` is not defined. However, allowing operators is currently being discussed. You can join or follow this
discussion in the [Solidity
forum](https://forum.soliditylang.org/t/user-defined-types-and-operators/456).

> 

Reviewer: I think we should also add an outlook how operators could work. Maybe by showing an example of the `WrappingUint` type?

Author: Added an example. I will also add a link to https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/issues/11953

    /// @return the largest integer that does not exceed `a`.
    function floor(UFixed256x18 a) internal pure returns (uint256) {
        return UFixed256x18.unwrap(a) / multiplier;
    }
    /// Turns a uint256 into a UFixed256x18 of the same value.
    /// Reverts if the integer is too large.
    function toUFixed256x18(uint256 a) internal pure returns (UFixed256x18) {
        return UFixed256x18.wrap(a * multiplier);
    }
}
```

Notice how `UFixed256x18.wrap` and `FixedMath.toUFixed256x18` have the same signature but perform
two very different operations: The `UFixed256x18.wrap` function returns a `UFixed256x18` that has
the same data representation as the input, whereas `toUFixed256x18` returns a `UFixed256x18` that
has the same numerical value. One can allow some form of type-encapsulation by only using the `wrap`
and `unwrap` functions in the file that defines the type.

## Operators and Type Rules

Explicit and implicit conversions to and from other types are disallowed.

Currently, no operators are defined for user defined value types. In particular, even the operator
`==` is not defined. However, allowing operators is currently being discussed. To give a short

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

outlook on the applications, one may want to introduce a new integer type that always does wrapping
arithmetic as follows:

```solidity
/// Proposal on defining operators on user defined value types
/// Note: this does not fully compile on Solidity 0.8.8; only a concept.

> type UncheckedInt is int8;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
type UncheckedInt8 is int8;
```
(I was checking twice why 127 is mentioned below)

> function add(UncheckedInt a, UncheckedInt b) pure returns(UncheckedInt) {
>     unchecked {
>         return UncheckedInt.wrap(UncheckedInt.unwrap(a) + UncheckedInt.unwrap(b));
>     }
> }
> 
> using {add as +} for UncheckedInt;
> 
> contract MockOperator {
>     UncheckedInt x;
>     function increment() external {
>         // This would not revert on overflow when x = 127
>         x = x + UncheckedInt.wrap(1);
>     }
> }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
function add(UncheckedInt a, UncheckedInt b) pure returns(UncheckedInt) {
    unchecked {
        return UncheckedInt.wrap(UncheckedInt.unwrap(a) + UncheckedInt.unwrap(b));
    }
}
function addInt(UncheckedInt a, uint b) pure returns(UncheckedInt) {
    unchecked {
        return UncheckedInt.wrap(UncheckedInt.unwrap(a) + b);
    }
}

using {add as +, addInt as +} for UncheckedInt;

contract MockOperator {
    UncheckedInt x;
    function increment() external {
        // This would not revert on overflow when x = 127
        x = x + 1;
    }
}
```

underlying type is also used in the ABI. This means that the following two `transfer` functions
would be identical, i.e., they have the same [function
selector](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/latest/abi-spec.html#function-selector) as well as the
same [ABI encoding and
decoding](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/latest/abi-spec.html#mapping-solidity-to-abi-types). This
allows using user defined value types in a backwards compatible way.

```solidity
pragma solidity ^0.8.8;

type Decimal18 is uint256;

interface MinimalERC20 {
    function transfer(address to, Decimal18 value) external;
}

interface AnotherMinimalERC20 {
    function transfer(address to, uint256 value) external;
}
```

Notice in the above example, how the user defined type `Decimal18` makes it clear that a value is
supposed to represent a number with 18 decimals.

## Example

The following example illustrates a custom type `UFixed` representing a decimal fixed point type
with 18 decimals and a minimal library to do arithmetic operations on the type.

```solidity
// SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-3.0
pragma solidity ^0.8.8;

// Represent a 18 decimal, 256 bit wide fixed point type using a user defined value type.

> type UFixed is uint256;

Author: Changed from `UFixed256x18` to `UFixed` to decrease the verbosity.
